RUNNING.md, before:

# Running Shell-operator

## Configuration

### Run in a cluster

- Build an image from flant/shell-operator:v1.2.0, copy your hooks to `/hooks` directory.
- Apply RBAC manifests.
- Apply Pod or Deployment manifest with the built image.

More detailed explanation is available in [README](README.md#quickstart), also see installing with Helm in the [example](/examples/201-install-with-helm-chart).

### Run outside of a cluster

- Setup kube context,
- Prepare hooks directory,
- Run shell-operator with context and path to hooks directory.

It is not recommended for production but can be useful while debugging hooks. A scenario can be like this:

```
# Start local cluster
kind create cluster

# Start Shell-operator from outside the cluster
shell-operator start --hooks-dir $(pwd)/hooks --tmp-dir $(pwd)/tmp --log-type color

```

### Environment variables and flags

You can configure the operator with the following environment variables and cli flags:

| CLI flag | Env-Variable name | Default | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
|---|---|---|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| --hooks-dir | SHELL_OPERATOR_HOOKS_DIR | `""` | A path to a hooks file structure                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| --tmp-dir | SHELL_OPERATOR_TMP_DIR | `"/tmp/shell-operator"` | A path to store temporary files with data for hooks                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| --listen-address | SHELL_OPERATOR_LISTEN_ADDRESS | `"0.0.0.0"` | Address to use for HTTP serving.                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| --listen-port | SHELL_OPERATOR_LISTEN_PORT | `"9115"` | Port to use for HTTP serving.                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| --prometheus-metrics-prefix | SHELL_OPERATOR_PROMETHEUS_METRICS_PREFIX | `"shell_operator_"` | A prefix for metrics names.                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| --kube-context | KUBE_CONTEXT | `""` | The name of the kubeconfig context to use. (as a `--context` flag of kubectl)                                                                                                                                                                         |
| --kube-config | KUBE_CONFIG | `""` | Path to the kubeconfig file. (as a `$KUBECONFIG` for kubectl)                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| --kube-client-qps | KUBE_CLIENT_QPS | `5` | QPS for rate limiter of k8s.io/client-go                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| --kube-client-burst | KUBE_CLIENT_BURST | `10` | burst for rate limiter of k8s.io/client-go                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| --object-patcher-kube-client-timeout | OBJECT_PATCHER_KUBE_CLIENT_TIMEOUT | `10s` | timeout for object patcher's requests to the Kubernetes API server                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| --jq-library-path | JQ_LIBRARY_PATH | `""` | Prepend directory to the search list for jq modules (works as `jq -L`).                                                                                                                                                                               |
| n/a | JQ_EXEC | `""` | Set to `yes` to use jq as executable — it is more for **developing purposes**.                                                                                                                                                                        |
| --log-level | LOG_LEVEL | `"info"` | Logging level: `debug`, `info`, `error`.                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| --log-type | LOG_TYPE | `"text"` | Logging formatter type: `json`, `text` or `color`.                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| --log-no-time | LOG_NO_TIME | `false` | Disable timestamp logging if flag is present. Useful when output is redirected to logging system that already adds timestamps.                                                                                                                        |
| --log-proxy-hook-json | LOG_PROXY_HOOK_JSON | `false` | Delegate hook stdout/ stderr JSON logging to the hooks and act as a proxy that adds some extra fields before just printing the output. **NOTE: It ignores `LOG_TYPE` for the output of the hooks; expects JSON lines to stdout/ stderr from the hooks** |
| --debug-keep-tmp-files | DEBUG_KEEP_TMP_FILES | `"no"` | Set to `yes` to keep files in $SHELL_OPERATOR_TMP_DIR for debugging purposes. Note that it can generate many files.                                                                                                                                   |
| --debug-unix-socket | DEBUG_UNIX_SOCKET | `"/var/run/shell-operator/debug.socket"` | Path to the unix socket file for debugging purposes.                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|  --validating-webhook-configuration-name | VALIDATING_WEBHOOK_CONFIGURATION_NAME | `"shell-operator-hooks"` | A name of a ValidatingWebhookConfiguration resource.                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|  --validating-webhook-service-name | VALIDATING_WEBHOOK_SERVICE_NAME | `"shell-operator-validating-svc"` | A name of a service used in ValidatingWebhookConfiguration.                                                                                                                                                                                           |
|  --validating-webhook-server-cert | VALIDATING_WEBHOOK_SERVER_CERT | `"/validating-certs/tls.crt"` | A path to a server certificate for service used in ValidatingWebhookConfiguration.                                                                                                                                                                    |
|  --validating-webhook-server-key | VALIDATING_WEBHOOK_SERVER_KEY | `"/validating-certs/tls.key"` | A path to a server private key for service used in ValidatingWebhookConfiguration.                                                                                                                                                                    |
|  --validating-webhook-ca | VALIDATING_WEBHOOK_CA | `"/validating-certs/ca.crt"` | A path to a ca certificate for ValidatingWebhookConfiguration.                                                                                                                                                                                        |
|  --validating-webhook-client-ca | VALIDATING_WEBHOOK_CLIENT_CA | [] | A path to a server certificate for ValidatingWebhookConfiguration.                                                                                                                                                                                    |
|  --conversion-webhook-service-name | CONVERSION_WEBHOOK_SERVICE_NAME | `"shell-operator-conversion-svc"` | A name of a service for clientConfig in CRD.                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|  --conversion-webhook-server-cert | CONVERSION_WEBHOOK_SERVER_CERT | `"/conversion-certs/tls.crt"` | A path to a server certificate for clientConfig in CRD.                                                                                                                                                                                               |
|  --conversion-webhook-server-key | CONVERSION_WEBHOOK_SERVER_KEY | `"/conversion-certs/tls.key"` | A path to a server private key for clientConfig in CRD.                                                                                                                                                                                               |
|  --conversion-webhook-ca | CONVERSION_WEBHOOK_CA | `"/conversion-certs/ca.crt"` | A path to a ca certificate for clientConfig in CRD.                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
|  --conversion-webhook-client-ca | CONVERSION_WEBHOOK_CLIENT_CA | [] | A path to a server certificate for CRD.spec.conversion.webhook.                                                                                                                                                                                       |


### Notes on JSON log proxying
* JSON log proxying (see above `--log-proxy-hook-json`) gives a lot of control to the hooks, which might want to use their own logger or different fields or log level
* It is incompatible with the other log flags in regard to filtering or configuring logging for the hooks. `shell-operator` will always expect valid json lines and output them regardless of the other flags
* The log lines from the hooks will be enhanced with these top-level fields, from `shell-operator` before being printed: 'hook', 'binding', 'event', 'task', 'queue'
* Configure hooks to use the `msg`, `time` and `level` fields for consistency with the logs coming from `shell-operator`. This, however, is not enforced.

## Debug

The following tools for debugging and fine-tuning of Shell-operator and hooks are available:

- Analysis of logs of a Shell-operator’s pod (enter `kubectl logs -f po/POD_NAME` in terminal),
- The environment variable can be set to `LOG_LEVEL=debug` to include the detailed debugging information into logs,
- You can view the contents of the working queues with cli command from inside a Pod:
   ```
   kubectl exec -ti po/shell-operator /bin/bash
   shell-operator queue list
   ```

Commit message:

feat(ci): store shell-operator images in ghcr.io (#467)
- publish dev and release images to ghcr.io
- use ghcr.io in Dockerfiles
- copy to Docker Hub in a separate step unis skopeo

Signed-off-by: Ivan Mikheykin <ivan.mikheykin@flant.com>

RUNNING.md, after:

# Running Shell-operator

## Configuration

### Run in a cluster

- Build an image from ghcr.io/flant/shell-operator:latest (or use a specific tag).
- Copy your hooks to `/hooks` directory.
- Apply RBAC manifests.
- Apply Pod or Deployment manifest with the built image.

More detailed explanation is available in [README](README.md#quickstart), also see installing with Helm in the [example](/examples/201-install-with-helm-chart).

### Run outside of a cluster

- Setup kube context,
- Prepare hooks directory,
- Run shell-operator with context and path to hooks directory.

It is not recommended for production but can be useful while debugging hooks. A scenario can be like this:

```
# Start local cluster
kind create cluster

# Start Shell-operator from outside the cluster
shell-operator start --hooks-dir $(pwd)/hooks --tmp-dir $(pwd)/tmp --log-type color

```

### Environment variables and flags

You can configure the operator with the following environment variables and cli flags:

| CLI flag | Env-Variable name | Default | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
|---|---|---|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| --hooks-dir | SHELL_OPERATOR_HOOKS_DIR | `""` | A path to a hooks file structure                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| --tmp-dir | SHELL_OPERATOR_TMP_DIR | `"/tmp/shell-operator"` | A path to store temporary files with data for hooks                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| --listen-address | SHELL_OPERATOR_LISTEN_ADDRESS | `"0.0.0.0"` | Address to use for HTTP serving.                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| --listen-port | SHELL_OPERATOR_LISTEN_PORT | `"9115"` | Port to use for HTTP serving.                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| --prometheus-metrics-prefix | SHELL_OPERATOR_PROMETHEUS_METRICS_PREFIX | `"shell_operator_"` | A prefix for metrics names.                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| --kube-context | KUBE_CONTEXT | `""` | The name of the kubeconfig context to use. (as a `--context` flag of kubectl)                                                                                                                                                                         |
| --kube-config | KUBE_CONFIG | `""` | Path to the kubeconfig file. (as a `$KUBECONFIG` for kubectl)                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| --kube-client-qps | KUBE_CLIENT_QPS | `5` | QPS for rate limiter of k8s.io/client-go                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| --kube-client-burst | KUBE_CLIENT_BURST | `10` | burst for rate limiter of k8s.io/client-go                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| --object-patcher-kube-client-timeout | OBJECT_PATCHER_KUBE_CLIENT_TIMEOUT | `10s` | timeout for object patcher's requests to the Kubernetes API server                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| --jq-library-path | JQ_LIBRARY_PATH | `""` | Prepend directory to the search list for jq modules (works as `jq -L`).                                                                                                                                                                               |
| n/a | JQ_EXEC | `""` | Set to `yes` to use jq as executable — it is more for **developing purposes**.                                                                                                                                                                        |
| --log-level | LOG_LEVEL | `"info"` | Logging level: `debug`, `info`, `error`.                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| --log-type | LOG_TYPE | `"text"` | Logging formatter type: `json`, `text` or `color`.                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| --log-no-time | LOG_NO_TIME | `false` | Disable timestamp logging if flag is present. Useful when output is redirected to logging system that already adds timestamps.                                                                                                                        |
| --log-proxy-hook-json | LOG_PROXY_HOOK_JSON | `false` | Delegate hook stdout/ stderr JSON logging to the hooks and act as a proxy that adds some extra fields before just printing the output. **NOTE: It ignores `LOG_TYPE` for the output of the hooks; expects JSON lines to stdout/ stderr from the hooks** |
| --debug-keep-tmp-files | DEBUG_KEEP_TMP_FILES | `"no"` | Set to `yes` to keep files in $SHELL_OPERATOR_TMP_DIR for debugging purposes. Note that it can generate many files.                                                                                                                                   |
| --debug-unix-socket | DEBUG_UNIX_SOCKET | `"/var/run/shell-operator/debug.socket"` | Path to the unix socket file for debugging purposes.                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|  --validating-webhook-configuration-name | VALIDATING_WEBHOOK_CONFIGURATION_NAME | `"shell-operator-hooks"` | A name of a ValidatingWebhookConfiguration resource.                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|  --validating-webhook-service-name | VALIDATING_WEBHOOK_SERVICE_NAME | `"shell-operator-validating-svc"` | A name of a service used in ValidatingWebhookConfiguration.                                                                                                                                                                                           |
|  --validating-webhook-server-cert | VALIDATING_WEBHOOK_SERVER_CERT | `"/validating-certs/tls.crt"` | A path to a server certificate for service used in ValidatingWebhookConfiguration.                                                                                                                                                                    |
|  --validating-webhook-server-key | VALIDATING_WEBHOOK_SERVER_KEY | `"/validating-certs/tls.key"` | A path to a server private key for service used in ValidatingWebhookConfiguration.                                                                                                                                                                    |
|  --validating-webhook-ca | VALIDATING_WEBHOOK_CA | `"/validating-certs/ca.crt"` | A path to a ca certificate for ValidatingWebhookConfiguration.                                                                                                                                                                                        |
|  --validating-webhook-client-ca | VALIDATING_WEBHOOK_CLIENT_CA | [] | A path to a server certificate for ValidatingWebhookConfiguration.                                                                                                                                                                                    |
|  --conversion-webhook-service-name | CONVERSION_WEBHOOK_SERVICE_NAME | `"shell-operator-conversion-svc"` | A name of a service for clientConfig in CRD.                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|  --conversion-webhook-server-cert | CONVERSION_WEBHOOK_SERVER_CERT | `"/conversion-certs/tls.crt"` | A path to a server certificate for clientConfig in CRD.                                                                                                                                                                                               |
|  --conversion-webhook-server-key | CONVERSION_WEBHOOK_SERVER_KEY | `"/conversion-certs/tls.key"` | A path to a server private key for clientConfig in CRD.                                                                                                                                                                                               |
|  --conversion-webhook-ca | CONVERSION_WEBHOOK_CA | `"/conversion-certs/ca.crt"` | A path to a ca certificate for clientConfig in CRD.                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
|  --conversion-webhook-client-ca | CONVERSION_WEBHOOK_CLIENT_CA | [] | A path to a server certificate for CRD.spec.conversion.webhook.                                                                                                                                                                                       |


### Notes on JSON log proxying
* JSON log proxying (see above `--log-proxy-hook-json`) gives a lot of control to the hooks, which might want to use their own logger or different fields or log level
* It is incompatible with the other log flags in regard to filtering or configuring logging for the hooks. `shell-operator` will always expect valid json lines and output them regardless of the other flags
* The log lines from the hooks will be enhanced with these top-level fields, from `shell-operator` before being printed: 'hook', 'binding', 'event', 'task', 'queue'
* Configure hooks to use the `msg`, `time` and `level` fields for consistency with the logs coming from `shell-operator`. This, however, is not enforced.

## Debug

The following tools for debugging and fine-tuning of Shell-operator and hooks are available:

- Analysis of logs of a Shell-operator’s pod (enter `kubectl logs -f po/POD_NAME` in terminal),
- The environment variable can be set to `LOG_LEVEL=debug` to include the detailed debugging information into logs,
- You can view the contents of the working queues with cli command from inside a Pod:
   ```
   kubectl exec -ti po/shell-operator /bin/bash
   shell-operator queue list
   ```
